Elasticsearch post (#153)
rootstrap/blog: content/Improve your Rails App searches with Elasticsearch - Leandro Dominguez.md

# Improve your Rails Apps searches with Elasticsearch

## Introduction

> When it comes to apps with a lot of data, some SQL queries take more time than expected, especially when we want to search text through several model attributes. The most known examples are e-commerces, but this kind of complex queries can happen in any other kind of apps like social media.

Reviewer: I think it would be nice if we added one more example, "like social media or ..."

> In these cases, we want to retrieve data from our database from a query a user made.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these cases, we want to retrieve data from our database given a query a user made.
```

wdyt?

It would be reasonable to wait for a user query containing fields from different models’ attributes and in these cases queries start to get complex and inefficient. What happens when our models attributes and their relationships start to grow? How do we manage user typos in those queries? What happens when a user looks for ‘ps4’ instead of ‘playstation 4’?

We’ll try to answer these and more questions in this post using Elasticsearch in our Ruby on Rails app.

> In this tutorial I will assume you have a basic understanding of Ruby on Rails applications and you have Elasticsearch server installed and a Rails app we will integrate with. If is not your case, you can [follow the official Elastic documentation]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html)) and use [our awesome Ruby on Rails boilerplate]([https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base](https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial I will assume you have a basic understanding of Ruby on Rails applications and have Elasticsearch server installed and a Rails app we will integrate with. If is not your case, you can [follow the official Elastic documentation]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html)) and use [our awesome Ruby on Rails boilerplate]([https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base](https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base)).
```

## But first… What is Elasticsearch?

> In their [official web]([https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/](https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/)) they describe Elasticsearch as a “_distributed, RESTful search and analytics engine capable of addressing a growing number of use cases. (...) it centrally stores your data for lightning fast search, fine‑tuned relevancy, and powerful analytics that scale with ease”_ and in my humble opinion that’s pretty true due its scalable and distributed architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In their [official web]([https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/](https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/)) they describe Elasticsearch as a “_distributed, RESTful search and analytics engine capable of addressing a growing number of use cases. (...) it centrally stores your data for lightning fast search, fine‑tuned relevancy, and powerful analytics that scale with ease”_ and in my humble opinion that’s pretty true due to its scalable and distributed architecture.
```

I'm not sure in this one, feel free to ignore this 👍

This [open source project]([https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch)) was built under the full-featured text search engine [Apache Lucene]([https://lucene.apache.org/core/](https://lucene.apache.org/core/)) and there is where most of the efficient magic happens.

In a nutshell, we’ll use Elasticsearch as a secondary database (a non-relational one), taking advantage of its text pre-processing and indexing power.

## A small disclaimer

> Although there are lots of interesting and useful gems in Rails to work with Elasticsearch like [chewy](https://github.com/toptal/chewy), [searchkick](https://github.com/ankane/searchkick) or [search_flip](https://github.com/mrkamel/search_flip) (which I encourage you to take a look), in this project we are going to use the two basics libraries provided by the Elasticsearch team: [elasticsearch-rails](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails) and [elasticsearch-model](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails/tree/master/elasticsearch-model). These two gems will let us both interact with the Elastic server instance using a ActiveRecord like syntax without having to write all the specific DSL and also update our records in the Elastic instance so we always keep as synchronized as possible with our relational database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although there are lots of interesting and useful gems in Rails to work with Elasticsearch like [chewy](https://github.com/toptal/chewy), [searchkick](https://github.com/ankane/searchkick) or [search_flip](https://github.com/mrkamel/search_flip) (which I encourage you to take a look), in this project we are going to use the two basic libraries provided by the Elasticsearch team: [elasticsearch-rails](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails) and [elasticsearch-model](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails/tree/master/elasticsearch-model). These two gems will let us both interact with the Elastic server instance using a ActiveRecord like syntax without having to write all the specific DSL and also update our records in the Elastic instance so we always keep as synchronized as possible with our relational database.
```

> Although there are lots of interesting and useful gems in Rails to work with Elasticsearch like [chewy](https://github.com/toptal/chewy), [searchkick](https://github.com/ankane/searchkick) or [search_flip](https://github.com/mrkamel/search_flip) (which I encourage you to take a look), in this project we are going to use the two basics libraries provided by the Elasticsearch team: [elasticsearch-rails](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails) and [elasticsearch-model](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails/tree/master/elasticsearch-model). These two gems will let us both interact with the Elastic server instance using a ActiveRecord like syntax without having to write all the specific DSL and also update our records in the Elastic instance so we always keep as synchronized as possible with our relational database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although there are lots of interesting and useful gems in Rails to work with Elasticsearch like [chewy](https://github.com/toptal/chewy), [searchkick](https://github.com/ankane/searchkick) or [search_flip](https://github.com/mrkamel/search_flip) (which I encourage you to take a look at), in this project we are going to use the two basics libraries provided by the Elasticsearch team: [elasticsearch-rails](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails) and [elasticsearch-model](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails/tree/master/elasticsearch-model). These two gems will let us both interact with the Elastic server instance using an ActiveRecord like syntax without having to write all the specific DSL and also update our records in the Elastic instance so we always keep as synchronized as possible with our relational database.
```

This last point is very important. Take into account we have two independent databases: one in which we’re gonna persist all the model data as you’re used to (Postgres) and this other new one for making fast searches, suggestions and use all other Elasticsearch fantastic features.

Sometimes (for performance or even business requirements), you don’t want to update data in Elasticsearch instantaneously every time a record has been changed in our main database (this is customizable but we won’t tackle this in the current article).

**Step 3: Defining our Elasticsearch index**

In Elasticsearch we don’t have tables or rows. Our models are stored in ‘_indexes’_ and each instance is called ‘_document’_. Although Elastic can automatically detect the attributes types of our model, we are going to declare them explicitly so we have more control over them by adding the following to your model:

```ruby
 settings do
   mappings dynamic: false do
     indexes :id, index: :not_analyzed
     indexes :title, type: :text, analyzer: :english
     indexes :body, type: :text, analyzer: :english
     indexes :topic, type: :keyword
   end
 end
```

> What are we doing here?

Reviewer 2: I think you may also want to explain the `dynamic: false` part, I was missing that when reading

Author: It was in the first version but since I thought was too large I started to take things out. But I don't this makes any difference. I'm adding it.

And last but not least, we are declaring `topic` as a _keyword_, meaning we are expecting this field only to be tokenized (and not processed or analyzed) making the inserts and edits faster. This is because we are not expected to search through this field, but feel free to play with different options.

**Step 4: Starting our Elasticsearch instance and creating our index**

> Assuming you already installed Elasticsearch, start an instance of Elastic by just executing in a terminal **elasticsearch** (remember I’m using _homebrew_). This will launch a server in the 9200 port by default. To check if everything is working as expected make a get request to [http://localhost:9200/](http://localhost:9200/) (could be just opening the URL in a browser).

Reviewer 2: While using homebrew shouldn't you do `brew services start elasticsearch`? Just a smartass comment to avoid other smartasses, I'm sure both work

Author: Only elasticsearch works for me 🤔

Reviewer 2: Yeah it was just to use the preferred way of running it

> Assuming you already installed Elasticsearch, start an instance of Elastic by just executing in a terminal **elasticsearch** (remember I’m using _homebrew_). This will launch a server in the 9200 port by default. To check if everything is working as expected make a get request to [http://localhost:9200/](http://localhost:9200/) (could be just opening the URL in a browser).

Reviewer 2: You could look like a badass and use cURL

```bash
curl -i -H "Accept: application/json" "http://localhost:9200/"
```

or just

```bash
curl "http://localhost:9200/"
```

    "build_type" : "tar",
    "build_hash" : "2f90bbf7b93631e52bafb59b3b049cb44ec25e96",
    "build_date" : "2019-10-28T20:40:44.881551Z",
    "build_snapshot" : false,
    "lucene_version" : "8.2.0",
    "minimum_wire_compatibility_version" : "6.8.0",
    "minimum_index_compatibility_version" : "6.0.0-beta1"
  },
  "tagline" : "You Know, for Search"
}
```

Now we have our Elastic instance up and running, open a Rails console and create the corresponding index by executing:

```ruby
Post.__elasticsearch__.create_index!
```

If you already had some posts created, you will need to reindex them by running the following:

```ruby
Post.import
```

This can take A LOT of time if you have too many records, since Elastic has to analyze and tokenize all of them.

**Step 5: define the search method we will call from the controller**

In the Posts’ model define this basic method that will execute a query in our Elasticsearch instance, taking a string and looking in the specified fields.

```ruby
   def self.our_first_query(query)
     search(
       query: {
         multi_match: {
           query: query,
           fields: %w[title body^5]
         }
       }
     )
   end
```

> This simple query will search through all our posts and retrieve them in order of importance. The ‘`^5`’ after `body` will make a match in this attribute to weigh 5 more times than one on `title`.

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it make more sense the other way around?

Author: I think both works and makes sense in my mind, but I'll do what you're suggesting!

Author: Mmmh, I think both make sense. In my case, I intentionally wanted to give more importance to the body, since there was the actual information. Although I understand your suggestion, I think I'll keep it like this so I don't have to change all search examples.

Reviewer 2: Cool, agreed

**Step 6: create your searches method in the controller, its view and routes.**

My controller method looks just like this

```ruby
 def search
   return unless query.present?

   @posts = Post.our_first_query(query)
 end
```

> Also, I did this simple view with a little of Bootstrap.

Reviewer: Maybe we can explain the story using one or two of `You`/`We`/`I`, just to be consistent through all the article

Author: Definitely 🙈. I'm fixing this. What is more accurate for a blog post?

Reviewer: I like using the `we` but that's just a matter of opinion 👍

![Search by semantic information](images/semantic_search.png)

As you can see, I created a bunch of posts using [faker]([https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker](https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker)).

Take a look into that search again… Don’t you see something special? We looked for ‘_darkness_’ and although we don’t have any matching result, we can see that the ones containing ‘_dark_’ were displayed. This is because of the text analyzers. They know these two words are not the same but they do have similar semantics.

Pretty easy, wasn’t it?

> What happens if we look for ‘_dakr_’ instead of ‘_dark_’?

Reviewer: I think we missed sth here 🤔

![No results found](images/with_typos.png)

Oops, no results. Let’s fix this.

**Step 7: searching with typos and highlighting the match in searches’ results.**

Our search will now look like this:

```ruby
def self.highlight(query)
 search(
   query: {
     multi_match: {
       query: query,
       fuzziness: 'AUTO',

>        fields: %w[body]

Reviewer 2: Did you remove the other field in the process?

Author: Oops, was missing in my project, but I'm fixing it.

     }
   },
   highlight: {
     pre_tags: ['<b>'],
     post_tags: ['</b>'],
     fields: {
       body: {}
     }
   }
 )
end
```

In this case we are basically adding new two features: _fuzziness_ and _highlight_.

With fuzziness we are making Elastic know that errors may appear in the query. This way, it will try to match similar words, so we now will not only cover semantic but syntactic errors too.

With the second part, we are making the match to be highlighted by adding pre and post tags (in this case HTML bold, but you can add whatever you want).

Let’s now search for ‘_dakrness_’: a word that is neither in our database nor is well written.

![Final results query](images/final_result.png)

## Conclusions

> Although in this post we’ve just covered the tip of the iceberg, we can see the potential of this search engine and how easy it is to integrate it to an Rails application. I encourage you to get lost into the wide [Elastic documentation]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/index.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/index.html)) and discover the huge potential that it can add to our applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although in this post we’ve just covered the tip of the iceberg, we can see the potential of this search engine and how easy it is to integrate it to a Rails application. I encourage you to get lost into the wide [Elastic documentation]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/index.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/index.html)) and discover the huge potential that it can add to our applications.
```

> We have being using Elasticsearch through some of our applications not only to admit typos and make searches smarter and faster but to adding [synonyms to some list of words]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html)) in our e-commerce apps where we expect searches like ‘ps4’ to match with ‘playstation 4’, ‘playstation four’, or ‘ipad’ to match ‘i pad’ or ‘i-pad’.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have being using Elasticsearch through some of our applications not only to admit typos and make searches smarter and faster but also to adding [synonyms to some list of words]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html)) in our e-commerce apps where we expect searches like ‘ps4’ to match with ‘playstation 4’, ‘playstation four’, or ‘ipad’ to match ‘i pad’ or ‘i-pad’.
```

# Improve your Rails Apps searches with Elasticsearch

## Introduction

When it comes to apps with a lot of data, some SQL queries take more time than expected, especially when we want to search text through several model attributes. The most known examples are e-commerces, but this kind of complex queries can happen in apps like social media or any other one that implies making suggestions based on user information or interaction with the platform.

In these cases, we want to retrieve data from our database given a query a user made.

It would be reasonable to wait for a user query containing fields from different models’ attributes and in these cases queries start to get complex and inefficient. What happens when our models attributes and their relationships start to grow? How do we manage user typos in those queries? What happens when a user looks for ‘ps4’ instead of ‘playstation 4’?

We’ll try to answer these and more questions in this post using Elasticsearch in our Ruby on Rails app.

> In this tutorial we will assume you have a basic understanding of Ruby on Rails applications and have Elasticsearch server installed and a Rails app we will integrate with. If is not your case, you can [follow the official Elastic documentation]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html)) and use [our awesome Ruby on Rails boilerplate]([https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base](https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base)).

Reviewer 3: `If this is not your case,`

## But first… What is Elasticsearch?

> In their [official web]([https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/](https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/)) they describe Elasticsearch as a “_distributed, RESTful search and analytics engine capable of addressing a growing number of use cases. (...) it centrally stores your data for lightning fast search, fine‑tuned relevancy, and powerful analytics that scale with ease”_ and in my humble opinion that’s pretty true due to its scalable and distributed architecture.

Reviewer 3: `_"distributed` the quotes should go in italics too, right?

This [open source project]([https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch)) was built under the full-featured text search engine [Apache Lucene]([https://lucene.apache.org/core/](https://lucene.apache.org/core/)) and there is where most of the efficient magic happens.

In a nutshell, we’ll use Elasticsearch as a secondary database (a non-relational one), taking advantage of its text pre-processing and indexing power.

## A small disclaimer

> Although there are lots of interesting and useful gems in Rails to work with Elasticsearch like [chewy](https://github.com/toptal/chewy), [searchkick](https://github.com/ankane/searchkick) or [search_flip](https://github.com/mrkamel/search_flip) (which I encourage you to take a look at), in this project we are going to use the two basic libraries provided by the Elasticsearch team: [elasticsearch-rails](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails) and [elasticsearch-model](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails/tree/master/elasticsearch-model). These two gems will let us both interact with the Elastic server instance using an ActiveRecord like syntax without having to write all the specific DSL and also update our records in the Elastic instance so we always keep as synchronized as possible with our relational database.

Reviewer 3: `ActiveRecord-like`

## Let’s get down to work!

### What are we going to build?

> We’re gonna build a really simple microblogging searcher, where we are going to be available to find posts accepting possible typos and highlighting the matching results really fast and performant. For this, we will use text analyzers and tokenizers ([natural language processing tools]([https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing))) that come out the box with Elastic.

Reviewer 3: `where we are going to make available...`?

`performantly` instead of `performant`

`For this, we will use text analyzers and tokenizers ([natural language processing tools](....` is there an `and` missing here?

Author: ![Screen Shot 2020-07-28 at 11 55 31 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42643389/88682620-3f772c00-d0c9-11ea-9467-c8a0e995592b.png)
No, is just a parenthesis clarifying what text analyzers and tokenizers are. Is everything ok here?

Reviewer 3: ahhh got it! nevermind then

**Step 1: Including required gems**

Add to your Rails Gemfile the two Elastic gems:

```ruby
gem 'elasticsearch-model', '~> 7.1.0'
gem 'elasticsearch-rails', '~> 7.1.0'
```

and install them running **bundle install**.

**Step 2: Adding Elastic behaviour to our model**

Given a simplified `Post` model with only a `title`, `body` and a `topic`, include the next lines into it:

```ruby
class Post < ApplicationRecord
 include Elasticsearch::Model
 include Elasticsearch::Model::Callbacks
end
```

The first `include` will let us make Elasticsearch calls in a friendly ActiveRecord-like syntax. This way we can, for example, just call `Post.search(query)` for searching. Otherwise we should manually make an API call to the Elastic server instance every time we want to interact with our data.

> The second include adds callbacks in our model, so every time we create, delete or edit a `Post`, this action will be replicated into Elasticsearch data.

Reviewer 3: I would highlight `include` here, like you did in the previous paragraph.

**Step 3: Defining our Elasticsearch index**

In Elasticsearch we don’t have tables or rows. Our models are stored in _`indexes`_ and each instance is called _`document`_. Although Elastic can automatically detect the attributes types of our model, we are going to declare them explicitly so we have more control over them by adding the following to your model:

```ruby
 settings do
   mappings dynamic: false do
     indexes :id, index: :not_analyzed
     indexes :title, type: :text, analyzer: :english
     indexes :body, type: :text, analyzer: :english
     indexes :topic, type: :keyword
   end
 end
```

**What are we doing here?**

In the second line, with `dynamic: false` we are avoiding new fields to be created accidentally. If you choose `dynamic: true`, every not-listed attribute will be automatically added in the index in an update or create query.

In the third line we are telling Elastic we want to take our `id` attribute and add it to the `Post`’ index as an index but without analyzing it. This means it won’t apply any filter or transformation to it.

> In the fourth and fifth line, we're adding both `title` and `body` as text type and with an English analyzer. This will automatically run text tokenizers, analyzers and will apply a lot of natural language processing tools every time we insert or edit a document in our index, making the searches faster, easier and typo-resistant (be aware all these things take an extra time). Follow these links if you’re interested in learning more about [language analyzers]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-lang-analyzer.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-lang-analyzer.html)) and [tokenizers]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-tokenizers.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-tokenizers.html))

Reviewer 3: You repeated the second url here.

Author: Oops. I repeated both. This was a Google Doc to Markdown conversion problem.

   @posts = Post.our_first_query(query)
 end
```

Also, I did this simple view with a little of Bootstrap.

![Search by semantic information](images/semantic_search.png)

As you can see, I created a bunch of posts using [faker]([https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker](https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker)).

Take a look into that search again… Don’t you see something special? We looked for ‘_darkness_’ and although we don’t have any matching result, we can see that the ones containing ‘_dark_’ were displayed. This is because of the text analyzers. They know these two words are not the same but they do have similar semantics.

Pretty easy, wasn’t it?

What happens if we look for ‘_dakr_’ instead of ‘_dark_’?

![No results found](images/with_typos.png)

Oops, no results. Let’s fix this.

**Step 7: searching with typos and highlighting the match in searches’ results.**

Our search will now look like this:

```ruby
def self.highlight(query)
 search(
   query: {
     multi_match: {
       query: query,
       fuzziness: 'AUTO',
       fields: %w[title body]
     }
   },
   highlight: {
     pre_tags: ['<b>'],
     post_tags: ['</b>'],
     fields: {
       body: {}
     }
   }
 )
end
```

> In this case we are basically adding new two features: _fuzziness_ and _highlight_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case we are basically adding two new features: _fuzziness_ and _highlight_.
```

With fuzziness we are making Elastic know that errors may appear in the query. This way, it will try to match similar words, so we now will not only cover semantic but syntactic errors too.

> With the second part, we are making the match to be highlighted by adding pre and post tags (in this case HTML bold, but you can add whatever you want).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With highlight, we are making the match to be highlighted by adding pre and post tags (in this case HTML bold, but you can add whatever you want).
```

I think it's better if you just say what was the second part even though you repeat it, like you did in the previous paragraph.

Let’s now search for ‘_dakrness_’: a word that is neither in our database nor is well written.

![Final results query](images/final_result.png)

## Conclusions

Although in this post we’ve just covered the tip of the iceberg, we can see the potential of this search engine and how easy it is to integrate it to a Rails application. I encourage you to get lost into the wide [Elastic documentation]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/index.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/index.html)) and discover the huge potential that it can add to our applications.

> We have being using Elasticsearch through some of our applications not only to admit typos and make searches smarter and faster but also to adding [synonyms to some list of words]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html)) in our e-commerce apps where we expect searches like ‘ps4’ to match with ‘playstation 4’, ‘playstation four’, or ‘ipad’ to match ‘i pad’ or ‘i-pad’.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have been using Elasticsearch in some of our applications not only to admit typos and make searches smarter and faster but also to add [synonyms to some list of words]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html)) in our e-commerce apps where we expect searches like ‘ps4’ to match with ‘playstation 4’, ‘playstation four’, or ‘ipad’ to match ‘i pad’ or ‘i-pad’.
```

Reviewer 3: I feel that the conclusion started out right, but then in this last paragraph you are telling about a very specific situation, so I guess something is missing to end the article. Maybe it can be something as simple as "Feel free to reach out if you have any questions." or something else just to close the article.

Author: You're right. I wanted to add this and didn't know where to exactly. Let me review this. Maybe I can put it as a suggestion.

> Check out there for other multiple uses. We have being using it in some of our applications not only to admit typos and make searches smarter and faster but also to adding [synonyms to some list of words]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html)) in our e-commerce apps where we expect searches like ‘ps4’ to match with ‘playstation 4’, ‘playstation four’, or ‘ipad’ to match ‘i pad’ or ‘i-pad’. It also has several interesting uses in [geospacial queries](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/geo-queries.html) including geodistances and geoshapes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Check out there for other multiple uses. We have been using it in some of our applications not only to admit typos and make searches smarter and faster but also to add [synonyms to some list of words]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html)) in our e-commerce apps where we expect searches like ‘ps4’ to match with ‘playstation 4’, ‘playstation four’, or ‘ipad’ to match ‘i pad’ or ‘i-pad’. It also has several interesting uses in [geospacial queries](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/geo-queries.html) including geodistances and geoshapes.
```

> # Improve your Rails Apps searches with Elasticsearch

Reviewer 4: Suggested Title Changes:  How to integrate Elasticsearch in your Ruby on Rails App (Example Tutorial)   

OR 

How to Build Application Search with Ruby on Rails and Elastic (Example Tutorial)

Author: I wrote you via Slack to talk a bit about this.

> # Improve your Rails Apps searches with Elasticsearch

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# How to Improve Ruby on Rails Apps Searches with Elasticsearch 
```

## Introduction

> When it comes to apps with a lot of data, some SQL queries take more time than expected, especially when we want to search text through several model attributes. The most known examples are e-commerces, but this kind of complex queries can happen in apps like social media or any other one that implies making suggestions based on user information or interaction with the platform.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When it comes to apps with a lot of data, some SQL queries take more time than expected, especially when we want to search text through several model attributes. This most commonly happens with e-commerce stores, but these kinds of complex queries can happen in social media apps or any query that makes suggestions based on user information or interaction with the platform.
```

In these cases, we want to retrieve data from our database given a query a user made.

> It would be reasonable to wait for a user query containing fields from different models’ attributes and in these cases queries start to get complex and inefficient. What happens when our models attributes and their relationships start to grow? How do we manage user typos in those queries? What happens when a user looks for ‘ps4’ instead of ‘playstation 4’?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It would be reasonable to wait for a user query containing fields from different models’ attributes and in these cases queries start to get complex and inefficient. What happens when our model's attributes and their relationships start to grow? How do we manage user typos in those queries? What happens when a user looks for ‘ps4’ instead of ‘playstation 4’?
```

> We’ll try to answer these and more questions in this post using Elasticsearch in our Ruby on Rails app.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We’ll try to answer this along with more questions about using Elasticsearch in a Ruby on Rails app.
```

> In this tutorial we will assume you have a basic understanding of Ruby on Rails applications and have Elasticsearch server installed and a Rails app we will integrate with. If this is not your case, you can [follow the official Elastic documentation]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html)) and use [our awesome Ruby on Rails boilerplate]([https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base](https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base)).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we will assume you have a basic understanding of Ruby on Rails applications, have Elasticsearch server installed, and a Rails app we will integrate with. If this is not the case,  If this is not your case, you can [follow the official Elastic documentation]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/brew.html)) and use [our awesome Ruby on Rails boilerplate]([https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base](https://github.com/rootstrap/rails_api_base)).
```

## But first… What is Elasticsearch?

> In their [official web]([https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/](https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/)) they describe Elasticsearch as a _"distributed, RESTful search and analytics engine capable of addressing a growing number of use cases. (...) it centrally stores your data for lightning fast search, fine‑tuned relevancy, and powerful analytics that scale with ease”_ and in my humble opinion that’s pretty true due to its scalable and distributed architecture.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 [Elasticsearch]([https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/](https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/))  is described as a _"distributed, RESTful search and analytics engine capable of addressing a growing number of use cases. (...) it centrally stores your data for lightning-fast search, fine‑tuned relevancy, and powerful analytics that scale with ease”_ and in my humble opinion that’s pretty true due to its scalable and distributed architecture.
```

In a nutshell, we’ll use Elasticsearch as a secondary database (a non-relational one), taking advantage of its text pre-processing and indexing power.

## A small disclaimer

Although there are lots of interesting and useful gems in Rails to work with Elasticsearch like [chewy](https://github.com/toptal/chewy), [searchkick](https://github.com/ankane/searchkick) or [search_flip](https://github.com/mrkamel/search_flip) (which I encourage you to take a look at), in this project we are going to use the two basic libraries provided by the Elasticsearch team: [elasticsearch-rails](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails) and [elasticsearch-model](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-rails/tree/master/elasticsearch-model). These two gems will let us both interact with the Elastic server instance using an ActiveRecord-like syntax without having to write all the specific DSL and also update our records in the Elastic instance so we always keep as synchronized as possible with our relational database.

## Let’s get down to work!

> ### What are we going to build?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Tutorial to Build a Microblogging Searcher
```

> ### What are we going to build?

Reviewer 4: A more descriptive title would be great here!

Author: Mmmmh I think I'm explaining this above, don't you think?

> We’re gonna build a really simple microblogging searcher, where we are going to make available to find posts accepting possible typos and highlighting the matching results really fast and performantly. For this, we will use text analyzers and tokenizers ([natural language processing tools]([https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing))) that come out the box with Elastic.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We’re gonna build a simple microblogging searcher,  a simple microblogging searcher, where we are going to make it possible to find posts despite potential typos quickly and accurately. For this, we will use text analyzers and tokenizers ([natural language processing tools]([https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing))) that come out of the box with Elastic.
```

**Step 1: Including required gems**

Add to your Rails Gemfile the two Elastic gems:

```ruby
gem 'elasticsearch-model', '~> 7.1.0'
gem 'elasticsearch-rails', '~> 7.1.0'
```

and install them running **bundle install**.

**Step 2: Adding Elastic behaviour to our model**

Given a simplified `Post` model with only a `title`, `body` and a `topic`, include the next lines into it:

```ruby
class Post < ApplicationRecord
 include Elasticsearch::Model
 include Elasticsearch::Model::Callbacks
end
```

> The first `include` will let us make Elasticsearch calls in a friendly ActiveRecord-like syntax. This way we can, for example, just call `Post.search(query)` for searching. Otherwise we should manually make an API call to the Elastic server instance every time we want to interact with our data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The first `include` will let us make Elasticsearch calls in a friendly ActiveRecord-like syntax. This way we can, for example, just call `Post.search(query)` for searching. Otherwise, we should manually make an API call to the Elastic server instance every time we want to interact with our data.
```

**Step 3: Defining our Elasticsearch index**

In Elasticsearch we don’t have tables or rows. Our models are stored in _`indexes`_ and each instance is called _`document`_. Although Elastic can automatically detect the attributes types of our model, we are going to declare them explicitly so we have more control over them by adding the following to your model:

```ruby
 settings do
   mappings dynamic: false do
     indexes :id, index: :not_analyzed
     indexes :title, type: :text, analyzer: :english
     indexes :body, type: :text, analyzer: :english
     indexes :topic, type: :keyword
   end
 end
```

**What are we doing here?**

In the second line, with `dynamic: false` we are avoiding new fields to be created accidentally. If you choose `dynamic: true`, every not-listed attribute will be automatically added in the index in an update or create query.

In the third line we are telling Elastic we want to take our `id` attribute and add it to the `Post`’ index as an index but without analyzing it. This means it won’t apply any filter or transformation to it.

> In the fourth and fifth line, we're adding both `title` and `body` as text type and with an English analyzer. This will automatically run text tokenizers, analyzers and will apply a lot of natural language processing tools every time we insert or edit a document in our index, making the searches faster, easier and typo-resistant (be aware all these things take an extra time). Follow these links if you’re interested in learning more about [language analyzers](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-lang-analyzer.html) and [tokenizers](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-tokenizers.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the fourth and fifth lines, we're adding both `title` and `body` as text type and with an English analyzer. This will automatically run text tokenizers, analyzers and will apply a lot of natural language processing tools every time we insert or edit a document in our index, making the searches faster, easier, and typo-resistant (be aware all these things take extra time). Follow these links if you’re interested in learning more about [language analyzers](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-lang-analyzer.html) and [tokenizers](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-tokenizers.html).
```

And last but not least, we are declaring `topic` as a _keyword_, meaning we are expecting this field only to be tokenized (and not processed or analyzed) making the inserts and edits faster. This is because we are not expected to search through this field, but feel free to play with different options.

**Step 4: Starting our Elasticsearch instance and creating our index**

Assuming we already installed Elasticsearch, we'll start an instance of Elastic by just executing in a terminal **elasticsearch** (remember I’m using _homebrew_). This will launch a server in the 9200 port by default. To check if everything is working as expected we can make a `GET` request with `curl "http://localhost:9200/"` (or could be just opening the URL in a browser).

> The response should see something like this:

Reviewer 5: look like?

```json
{
  "name" : "192.168.0.100",
  "cluster_name" : "elasticsearch_instance",
  "cluster_uuid" : "LjE5yneZRWOUFnlasU6y7g",
  "version" : {
    "number" : "7.4.2",
    "build_flavor" : "default",
    "build_type" : "tar",
    "build_hash" : "2f90bbf7b93631e52bafb59b3b049cb44ec25e96",
    "build_date" : "2019-10-28T20:40:44.881551Z",
    "build_snapshot" : false,
    "lucene_version" : "8.2.0",
    "minimum_wire_compatibility_version" : "6.8.0",
    "minimum_index_compatibility_version" : "6.0.0-beta1"
  },
  "tagline" : "You Know, for Search"
}
```

Now we have our Elastic instance up and running, let's open a Rails console and create the corresponding index by executing:

```ruby
Post.__elasticsearch__.create_index!
```

If you already had some posts created, you will need to reindex them by running the following:

```ruby
Post.import
```

> This can take A LOT of time if you have too many records, since Elastic has to analyze and tokenize all of them.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This can take A LOT of time if you have too many records since Elastic has to analyze and tokenize all of them.
```

**Step 5: define the search method we will call from the controller**

> In the Posts’ model we'll define this basic method that will execute a query in our Elasticsearch instance, taking a string and looking in the specified fields.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the Posts’ model, we'll define this basic method that will execute a query in our Elasticsearch instance, taking a string and looking in the specified fields.
```

```ruby
   def self.our_first_query(query)
     search(
       query: {
         multi_match: {
           query: query,
           fields: %w[title body^5]
         }
       }
     )
   end
```

This simple query will search through all our posts and retrieve them in order of importance. The ‘`^5`’ after `body` will make a match in this attribute to weigh 5 more times than one on `title`.

**Step 6: create your searches method in the controller, its view and routes.**

My controller method looks just like this

```ruby
 def search
   return unless query.present?

   @posts = Post.our_first_query(query)
 end
```

Also, I did this simple view with a little of Bootstrap.

![Search by semantic information](images/semantic_search.png)

As you can see, I created a bunch of posts using [faker]([https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker](https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker)).

> Take a look into that search again… Don’t you see something special? We looked for ‘_darkness_’ and although we don’t have any matching result, we can see that the ones containing ‘_dark_’ were displayed. This is because of the text analyzers. They know these two words are not the same but they do have similar semantics.

Reviewer 5: `...anything special?` ?

Pretty easy, wasn’t it?

What happens if we look for ‘_dakr_’ instead of ‘_dark_’?

![No results found](images/with_typos.png)

Oops, no results. Let’s fix this.

**Step 7: searching with typos and highlighting the match in searches’ results.**

Our search will now look like this:

```ruby
def self.highlight(query)
 search(
   query: {
     multi_match: {
       query: query,
       fuzziness: 'AUTO',
       fields: %w[title body]
     }
   },
   highlight: {
     pre_tags: ['<b>'],
     post_tags: ['</b>'],
     fields: {
       body: {}
     }
   }
 )
end
```

> In this case we are basically adding two new features: _fuzziness_ and _highlight_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this case, we are basically adding two new features: _fuzziness_ and _highlight_.
```

Let’s now search for ‘_dakrness_’: a word that is neither in our database nor is well written.

![Final results query](images/final_result.png)

## Conclusions

Although in this post we’ve just covered the tip of the iceberg, we can see the potential of this search engine and how easy it is to integrate it to a Rails application.

Elastic also has several other applications. For example, we have been using it in some of our applications not only to admit typos and make searches smarter and faster but also to add [synonyms to some list of words]([https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/analysis-synonym-tokenfilter.html)) in our e-commerce apps where we expect searches like ‘ps4’ to match with ‘playstation 4’, ‘playstation four’, or ‘ipad’ to match ‘i pad’ or ‘i-pad’. It also has several interesting uses in [geospacial queries](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/geo-queries.html) including geodistances and geoshapes.

> 

Reviewer 5: This part doesn't look like a conclusion. It's like an "additional info" section.
For example, you start saying: `Elastic also has several other applications. For example, w...`
I would like something like "Elastic is a great tool to XXX and YYY, and also ZZZ"

Author: Yep, @missx told me something similar. Maybe I have to work a little bit more on this.
